Add log retention by op id policy documentation (#2773)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: architecture/design/multi-region-2DC-deployment.md

This combination of `WAITING_TO_COMMIT` status and `tablets_received_applying_record` field will be used to ensure that transaction records are applied atomically on the replicated universe.

# Handling network partitions and consumer failures

> As mentioned before, we replicate records from the WAL (internally known as log) only, so if WAL files containing unreplicated records are garbage collected because of all of its records have already been flushed, these records won't be able to be replicated. So when a network partition happens between two universes being replicated (2DC), or when the consumer data center fails, we want to keep the logs in the producer as long as possible so that once the network or the consumer data center recovers, we can continue replicating the changes to the consumer using the normal replication mechanism (no bulk copy of data required).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned before, we replicate records from the WAL (internally known as log) only, so if WAL files containing unreplicated records are garbage collected because all of its records have already been flushed, then we won't be able to replicate these records. So when a network partition happens between two universes being replicated (2DC), or when the consumer data center fails, we want to keep the logs in the producer as long as possible so that once the network or the consumer data center recovers, we can continue replicating the changes to the consumer using the normal replication mechanism (no bulk copy of data required).
```

## Current log retention policies

> Currently, we have two different policies for deciding which log segments to retain. A time-based policy and a policy based on the minimum number of files. These policies are controlled by the gflags `log_min_seconds_to_retain` with a default value of `300` and `log_min_segments_to_retain` with a default value of `2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, we have two different policies for deciding which log segments to retain: a time-based policy and a policy based on the minimum number of files. These policies are controlled by the gflags `log_min_seconds_to_retain` with a default value of `300` and `log_min_segments_to_retain` with a default value of `2`.
```

For the time-based policy, the Log object also uses a private variable `wal_retention_secs_` which gets modified through an `ALTER TABLE` request. When deciding if a log file is old enough to be deleted, we use `max(log_min_seconds_to_retain, wal_retention_secs_)`.

To avoid deleting log segments that contain unreplicated entries, we will add a new policy based on the minimum op id that we want to retain. This new policy will be disabled by default and will be controlled by the gflag `enable_log_retention_by_op_idx`.

> Because of the possibility of very long network partitions or unused cdc streams that were not deleted, we will have an option in which the op id policy is ignored if the tserver is running out of disk space. If the gflag `log_stop_retaining_min_disk_mb` is set, we will stop retaining records with unreplicated entries once disk space is less than the specified value. This gflag will not affect log segments that are being retained because its entries haven’t been flushed to rocksDB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of the possibility of very long network partitions or unused cdc streams that were not deleted, we will have an option in which the op id policy is ignored if the tserver is running out of disk space. If the gflag `log_stop_retaining_min_disk_mb` is set, we will stop retaining records with unreplicated entries once disk space is less than the specified value. This gflag will not affect log segments whose entries haven’t been flushed to rocksDB.
```

## Last replicated op id
Our 2DC implementation can only replicate entries that are in the log files (it’s not possible to replicate entries that are only in rocksDB), so it’s important that we don’t delete log files that contain unreplicated entries.

When a consumer polls for changes, it sends to the producer the latest replicated op id, and this information is saved on the producer's `cdc_state` table. The producer will take this information and call `Log::SetMinimumOpIdToRetain()`. This will in turn set the private variable `minimum_op_idx_to_retain_` which will be used by the Log garbage collector only when enable_log_retention_by_op_idx is set to true.

`Log::SetMinimumOpIdToRetain()` will be called every time a cdc stream’s last replicated op id is updated (in `CDCServiceImpl::UpdateCheckpoint`) and every time the cdc service starts.

> ## Setting up the op id retention policy

Reviewer: Move this section about `Last replicated op id`

Author: Do you want me to move this section up?

Reviewer: Yes, sorry I had a typo in my comment above. I meant `Move this above Last replicated op id` and not `about Last replicated op id`.

> For this policy to be active, all the tservers in the producing universe will have to be started with `--enable_log_retention_by_op_idx=true`. Initially, if no cdc stream is setup for a specific table, the policy will remain disabled for all the tablets in the table. Once the first cdc stream is setup, `Log::SetMinimumOpIdToRetain()` will be called with a value of 0. This will effectively disable garbage collection of log files until the consumer updates the latest replicated op id.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this policy to be active, all the tservers in the producer universe will have to be started with `--enable_log_retention_by_op_idx=true`. Initially, if no cdc stream is setup for a specific table, the policy will remain disabled for all the tablets in the table. Once the first cdc stream is setup, `Log::SetMinimumOpIdToRetain()` will be called with a value of 0. This will effectively disable garbage collection of log files until the consumer updates the latest replicated op id.
```

Since we don’t have a mechanism to bootstrap a consumer once necessary log files have been deleted, this design only works when a 2DC consumer is setup soon after a table has been created in the producer. By default, `log_min_seconds_to_retain` is `300`, but we will allow users to modify this value for a specific table through the `yb-admin` command. That way, only log files for a specific table are retained for a long time so that when a cdc stream is created, all the records are available in the log files.

> ## Executing the minimum op id retention policy

Reviewer: I think we can remove this section - it's a lot of details about the code changes that need to be done and we don't need to add this to architecture doc IMO.

We currently decide which log files to delete in Log::GetSegmentsToGCUnlocked(int64_t min_op_idx, SegmentSequence* segments_to_gc). This function gets called by Log::GC(int64_t min_op_idx, int32_t* num_gced).

The list of log segments that are candidates to be GCed is generated by `LogReader::GetSegmentPrefixNotIncluding`. This method takes an op id index as a parameterto generate a list of log segments with log entries earlier than the specified op id. Since we will have a couple of new flags `log_max_seconds_to_retain` and `log_stop_retaining_min_disk_mb` that are used to override the op id retention policy, we need to be careful so that we don’t delete a log segment that contains unflushed entries since this will violate our durability guarantee. `LogReader::GetSegmentPrefixNotIncluding` will have to be aware of the two different indices: `min_flushed_index` and `min_cdc_replicated_index`. If all the entries in a log file are greater than `min_replicated_index`, and less than `min_flushed_index`, then this file could be GCed if its age is older than `log_max_seconds_to_retain` or if the storage available for logs is less than `log_stop_retaining_min_disk_mb`.

> ## Updating the last replicated op id

Reviewer: We can remove this section since you've already written about updating the op id during polling in the `Last replicated op id` section.

## Propagating last replicated op id to followers
Once the producer has set its log minimum op id, it will propagate this information to the tablet followers through the heartbeat mechanism. This will be a best-effort propagation since it is safe if the followers miss this information since at worst, they will have an older op id.

Possible improvement: If we want to guarantee that all the followers get the last replicated op id, we could create a new master RPC similar to `ALTER TABLE`, and the master would be in charge of guaranteeing that all the followers eventually get the latest information. This might not provide any benefit because we would have to limit how often we call this RPC to avoid flooding the master leader with a request each time the consumer updates the replicated op id.

> Possible improvement: Just as we save wal_retention_secs in the tablet metadata, we could do the same for `minimum_op_idx_to_retain_` so that whenever a new tablet is bootstrapped, it receives this information before it begins its local bootstrap process. This information would also survive  tserver restarts. Again, this might not provide any benefit, since whenever a tserver is remote bootstrapped, it could assume that it has to retain all the logs received until it gets the correct op id through the heartbeat.

Reviewer: Merge these 2 into:
```
Potential future improvements:
1) ...
2) ...
```
